Matthew appeals to Zechariah 11:4–9 in discussing the death of Judas. He claims this fulfills the prophecy from Jeremiah where people would take thirty pieces of silver to buy a potter’s field (Matt. 27:6–10). Two major issues revolve around Matthew’s use of Zechariah. The first matter concerns whether the text in Zechariah was prophetic to begin with. The second matter is why Matthew quotes from Zechariah, yet states that it came from Jeremiah. Did Matthew forget where the scriptural text was from?

We will first address the former question. Is Zechariah 11:4–9 a prophecy of the future? Some commentators point out the shepherd in Zechariah 11:4–9 was Zechariah and so he acted out something depicting present realities.67 Numerous difficulties (and thereby numerous views) exist in identifying what Zechariah depicts.68 Although the issues are complex, a good argument can be made that Zechariah intended chapter 11 to portray future realities. First, Zechariah has used individuals of his time to portray a future messianic individual. For example, he casts Joshua the priest as an analogy of the Messiah by calling him the “Branch” and “Servant” (Zech. 3:1–10; 6:9–15). He may also do something similar with Zerubbabel (Zech. 4:7).69 Zechariah’s own actions as a “shepherd” follows this pattern of using present characters to depict future realities. Second, the context of Zechariah 11:9 has a consistently predictive element. In addition to prophecies throughout the book (cf. Zech. 3:8–10; 6:9–15; 8:1–23), the specific section of Zechariah 9–11 is highly eschatological (cf. Zech. 9:11–17; 10:5–7).70 Even in the same chapter, Zechariah seems to predict the fall of Jerusalem in 70 AD.71 The context suggests Zechariah 11 should portray the future. Finally, scholars acknowledge Zechariah 11 reflects Ezekiel 34 because of their discussion of the shepherd using highly similar wording.72 Since Ezekiel explicitly states the shepherd is the new David (Ezek. 34:23), Zechariah is also speaking about this same individual. Thus, broad, immediate, and intertextual context indicates Zechariah’s speech-act is one that portrays future events about the Messiah. Accordingly, as Klein concludes, the use of Zechariah itself in Matthew is reasonable. It is prediction-actualization.

The more substantial problem is the second major issue. Matthew does not claim he cites Zechariah but rather Jeremiah. Although Matthew may rightly understand the meaning of the words in context, did he forget where the quote actually came from? Some of the solutions include that the apostle stated “Jeremiah” as a catchphrase for all the prophets or that Jeremiah was the title to a section of the Old Testament.74 However, Matthew does not typically do this. He claims to quote from Isaiah (Matt. 3:3; 4:14) and Jeremiah (Matt. 2:17) and does so correctly.

As with the example of Hosea above, Matthew’s choice of passage and wording is intentional. It is an indicator to how he reasons. Is there a reason why Matthew cites Zechariah but claims it comes from Jeremiah? Blomberg points out this is probably the use of a juxtaposition or conflation.75 Like we observed earlier, the New Testament writers juxtaposed Old Testament texts together. This was akin to how their Old Testament counterparts read previous revelation intertextually. Matthew may have been thinking through Jeremiah and Zechariah together. This particularly makes sense, since he mentions “blood of the innocent” (αἷμα ἀθῷον; v. 4) and the “potter” (τοῦ κεραμέως; v. 7), terms found in Jeremiah 19:1–13.76 So Matthew is likely thinking of Zechariah 11, Jeremiah 19, as well as some other texts in Jeremiah that deal with the potter (Jer. 18:1–11).77 Thus, Matthew’s statement about Jeremiah is to alert his readers of how he reads Zechariah with Jeremiah.

However, is that warranted? Put differently, did Matthew impose this connection, or did he recognize an already existing connection? The prophetic hermeneutic now comes into play. Zechariah 11:13 discusses how God commanded Zechariah to throw his wages (thirty pieces of silver) to the potter. We should wonder why Zechariah discusses the potter to begin with (11:13). The detail is seemingly superfluous. Why does YHWH command Zechariah to throw the money to the potter as opposed to merely casting the money away?

The specific Hebrew phrase “the potter” (הַיּוֹצֵר) only occurs in two texts: Jeremiah 18–19 and Zechariah 11:13.78 In Jeremiah, the potter was an individual whom God used to illustrate his sovereign judgment in exile. God can deal with Israel like the potter deals with clay (18:6). The Lord also smashes a vessel made by the potter to show his judgment against his people (19:11). In this way, the potter is somewhat like the “grim reaper.” As the grim reaper is an emblem of death, so the potter is an emblem of judgment and exile. By alluding to the potter, Zechariah’s prophecy reminds the people their rejection of the Shepherd will lead them further into exile as opposed to out of it. In fact, Zechariah states as a result of the rejection of the true Shepherd, Israel will encounter a false leader, a foolish shepherd (Zech. 11:15) who will cause great devastation for the nation (Zech. 11:16). Zechariah builds upon the theology of exile first presented in Jeremiah. He shows the ramifications of Jeremiah’s prediction for all of Israel’s exile.

Matthew picks up on this stream of logic. As noted, he crafts his narrative to include not only elements of Zechariah but also Jeremiah (compare Matt. 27:4–7; Jer. 19:1–13). In context, Israel had hoped for a Messiah to lead them out of foreign oppression. When Jesus offered the forgiveness of sin, they rejected him. However, in doing so, the irony is clear: They actually plunged themselves deeper into exile. The money went to the potter, the “grim reaper” of exile. God’s plan advances just as Jeremiah and Zechariah explained.79

Thus, Matthew is not bizarre. His mention of Jeremiah is strategic. It helps one trace a theology of exile from Jeremiah through Zechariah into the time of Christ’s first advent. Within this, the prophetic hermeneutic functioned in two ways to help anchor Matthew’s interpretation. It demonstrates Zechariah’s words were indeed foretelling about the Messiah (e.g., Zechariah’s use of Shepherd and Ezek. 34). Even more, Zechariah’s use of Jeremiah helped to bring out a theology of exile that Matthew in turn advances. Matthew by a series of textual clues draws the reader to this chain of texts. The prophetic hermeneutic continues into the apostolic hermeneutic thereby.

Chou, Abner. The Hermeneutics of the Biblical Writers: Learning to Interpret Scripture from the Prophets and Apostles (p. 138-141). (Function). Kindle Edition. 